             ------------------------------------------
             Lightweight Autonomic Network Architecture
             ------------------------------------------

Network programming is widely understood as programming strictly defined socket
interfaces. Only some frameworks have made a step towards real network programming
by decomposing networking functionality into small modular blocks that can be 
assembled in a flexible manner. In this work, we tackle the challenge of 
accommodating 3 partially conflicting objectives: (i) high flexibility for 
network programmers, (ii) re-configuration of the network stack at runtime, and 
(iii) high packet forwarding rates. First experiences with a prototype
implementation in Linux suggest little performance overhead compared to the 
standard Linux protocol stack.

Beyond doubt, the Internet has grown out of its infancy and has become a critical
infrastructure for private and business applications. Its success is largely due
to the plethora of transport media it uses and to the rich set of network
applications it offers. Yet, network programming is still mainly about programming
sockets that form a strictly defined interface between the networking (TCP/IP)
and the actual application part (Facebook, VoIP, etc.). What if designers of
network applications could even tailor the networking functionality to their
needs? We can just speculate about the resulting innovations.
Nowadays, changes in the configuration of a protocol stack usually require
applications or even the operating system to be restarted. The need for changing
the protocol stack can arise if networking functionality needs to be patched, if
the used encryption method is not considered safe anymore, or when privacy
concerns change. Ideally, applications should not be affected by such changes.
Therefore, we advocate run time reconfigurable protocol stacks. For example, 
such protocol stacks can be useful for self-star properties in computing, since
they provide an algorithm that configures and adapts the protocol stack
autonomously.

Similar objectives were also followed by active networking [3], the Click modular
router project[4], or OpenFlow [5], etc. Yet, we are not aware of any research
that has achieved the following three partially conflicting goals:
  1. Simple integration and testing of new protocols on end
     nodes on all layers of the protocol stack.
  2. Runtime reconfiguration of the protocol stack in order
     to allow for even bigger flexibility.
  3. High performance packet forwarding rates.
In this work, we propose the Lightweight Autonomic Network Architecture (LANA).
Our architecture borrows ideas from ANA [2], where network functionality is
divided into functional blocks (FB) that can be combined as required.
Each FB implements a protocol such as IP, UDP, or content centric routing. ANA
does not impose any protocols to be used. Rather it provides a framework that
allows for the flexible composition and recomposition of FBs to a protocol stack.
This allows for the experimentation with protocol stacks that are not known by
today’s standard operating systems, and it allows for the optimization of
protocol stacks at runtime without communication tear down or application
support. The existing implementation of ANA shows the feasibility of such a
flexible architecture but suffers sever performance issues. In contrast to ANA,
the proposed LANA architecture relies on a message passing by reference scheme,
minimizes the number of threads, and uses optimized packet processing structures
provided by the Linux kernel. Surprisingly, our first experiences with a
prototype implementation suggest that we can offer comparable flexibility as
ANA, but at packet forwarding rates comparable to those of the standard Linux
networking stack.

This research has received funding from the European Union 7th Framework
Programme (grant no 257906).

Web: http://www.ana-project.org/, http://www.epics-project.eu/

